Human Resources Policy 07 – Pay, Benefits and Leave  
Last updated: August 17, 2018 
This policy statement covers pay, benefits and leave for both excluded and bargaining unit 
employees appointed under the Public Service Act. The policy statement supports the core 
policy objective of ensuring that “government is supported by a professional public service 
that has the knowledge, skills and abilities to achieve current and future objectives.” This 
policy statement is an adjunct to the applicable collective agreement or Terms and 
Conditions of Employment, and provides additional direction on issues not covered by 
these documents. If there is a conflict, the collective agreement or Terms and Conditions 
of Employment will take precedence over this policy statement. 
Pay   
Salary on Appointment  
Excluded Employees  
Organizations must ensure that the necessary funds are available and that compensation 
decisions represent an appropriate expenditure of funds. Organizations must balance 
mitigating compensation costs with meeting their human resources needs. Organizations 
are responsible for:  
• Ensuring work assignments are excluded from the bargaining unit, where 
appropriate;  
• Documenting compensation decisions, including authority, the rationale for the 
compensation decision, and the effective date;  
• Obtaining approval from the Agency Head to exceed the maximum salary of the 
“Band 6” for exceptional circumstances that supports a critical business need; and  
• Ensuring that no pattern of systemic discrimination emerges.  
Bargaining Unit and Schedule “A” Employees  
New employees who are appointed to a position with a step salary range are placed at 
Step 1 of the range unless there is a compelling need to attract that particular person and 
the salary placement complies with the collective agreement or Terms and Conditions of 
Employment. 
1 
Auxiliary Employees going to a Regular Established Position 
On promotion, an auxiliary employee who moves without a break in service to a regular 
position will receive the rate for the position which is the closest step to 8% above their 
previous rate, or the minimum of the new range, whichever is greater, but not more than 
the top of the new salary range. If a single rate applies to the position, the employee shall 
receive it. The term "without a break in service" means that the employee moves from the 
auxiliary position to the regular position on the next available working day taking into 
account shift changes, days of rest, statutory holidays or other approved scheduled time 
off, but does not include a recall. Other auxiliary moves to regular positions will be treated 
as new appointments. 
On a demotion, an auxiliary who has in-service status prior to the closing date of the 
competition, shall receive a maximum reduction which is the closest step to 8%, but where 
the difference between the employee's salary before demotion and the maximum salary 
of the new position is greater than 8%, the new salary shall be the maximum of the new 
position. If a single rate applies to the position the employee shall receive it. In the event a 
Ministry requests a salary that is less than an 8% reduction, this may be granted provided 
it is reasonable and fair in all of the circumstances. This does not apply to an auxiliary 
employee who is being concurrently hired into a regular position. Salary assignment for a 
concurrent hire is the same as that for a new hire. 
Completion of Probationary Period  
Employees in a step salary range follow the established increment process (see Salary 
Increments below) and are not eligible for a salary step increase upon completion of their 
probationary period. 
Salary Increments  
All excluded and bargaining unit employees, except legal counsel, who are on a step 
salary range, are eligible for salary increments. 
Regular Full-Time Employees  
Salary increments are effective the first day of the pay period following the anniversary 
date of their appointment, promotion, or reclassification to their current position. 
Increments for regular, fulltime nurses are effective 18 months from their date of 
appointment, promotion or reclassification.  Effective September 3, 2017, salary 
2 
increments for nurses will occur every 12 months, with the first increment effective the 
first day of the pay period 12 months after their initial date of appointment, promotion, 
reclassification or increment.  Existing employees as of September 3, 2017 must complete 
the current 18-month period between increments before moving to the 12-month 
schedule. 
Part-Time and Auxiliary Employees 
Increments are effective the first day of the pay period following the date employees 
accumulate 1,827 straight-time hours paid from the date of appointment, promotion or 
reclassification to their current position. The next increment is effective following 
accumulation of the next 1,827 straight-time hours and so on. For auxiliary employees, the 
qualifying straight time hours must be:  
• At the same classification level; and  
• There must be no loss of seniority as outlined by the provisions of the applicable 
collective agreement or contract of employment.  
Part-time or auxiliary nurses need to accumulate 2,614.5 regular working hours for the 
next increment to be effective. Statutory holidays and overtime are not included. Effective 
September 3, 2017, nurses who are appointed, promoted or reclassified on or after this 
date must work 1,743 straight-time hours to earn an increment. Members of the 
Professional Employees Association (PEA) must accumulate 1,743 regular working hours. 
Statutory holidays and overtime are not included. 
Promotion or Upward Reclassification within Three Months of an Increment  
Where employees are promoted or reclassified upward within three months of an 
upcoming increment, their new pay will be calculated based on their salary on the 
upcoming increment date. The date of the reclassification or promotion becomes their 
new anniversary date for increment purposes if they have not yet attained the maximum 
step of their new salary grid. 
Increments on Demotion or Downward Reclassification  
Employees who are demoted or reclassified to a lower classification normally retain their 
current anniversary date or accumulated hours for increment purposes. Only where 
employees are demoted from a position with a single salary to a position with a salary 
range, and they are not at the maximum of the new salary range, will the date of their 
demotion or reclassification be used as the increment anniversary date.  
3 
Increments on Lateral Transfer  
Regular employees who are laterally transferred will retain their anniversary date for 
increment purposes. 
Increments During Periods of Substitution  
Employees who are designated to substitute will have the time period of the substitution 
credited towards their next increment, if applicable, in their base position. On receipt of an 
increment in the base position, the employee’s substitution pay is recalculated pursuant to 
the provisions of the collective agreements or the employee’s terms and conditions of 
employment. 
Increments During Periods of Temporary Appointment/Reclassification  
Salary increments for regular employees who have been temporarily appointed / 
reclassified are based on the applicable section of this policy statement relating to 
promotions, demotions, or lateral transfers.  
When employees return to their permanent position at the end of a temporary 
appointment/reclassification, the time period of the temporary appointment / 
reclassification is credited towards their next increment, if applicable, in their permanent 
position (they return to the salary and increment date that would apply if the temporary 
appointment/reclassification had not occurred).  
Salary changes in the permanent base position that take effect during the temporary 
appointment do not affect the salary/step placement of their temporary appointment (for 
example, if the base position is reclassified during the temporary appointment, their 
temporary appointment pay is not recalculated).  
Where, during a temporary appointment, employees are appointed to another position or 
another temporary appointment/reclassification occurs, their pay on appointment and 
salary increments are based on their original permanent position/classification.  
Where employees are permanently appointed to the position in which they are currently 
temporarily appointed, they keep the anniversary date of the temporary appointment. The 
hours worked in a previous temporary appointment cannot be accumulated and applied 
to a new temporary appointment even if the temporary appointment is to the same 
position.  
4 
Where employees are permanently reclassified to the level in which they are currently 
temporarily reclassified, they keep the anniversary date of the temporary reclassification. 
The hours worked in a previous temporary reclassification cannot be accumulated and 
applied to a new temporary reclassification even if the temporary reclassification is to the 
same classification. 
Changing Status – Auxiliary to Regular (Same Classification)  
Auxiliary employees who are appointed to regular positions at the same classification with 
no break in service have the time worked towards receiving an increment as an auxiliary 
credited towards their next increment. For the purposes of this policy statement, "no 
break in service" means that the employee moves from the present position to the new 
position on the next available working day, taking into account shift changes, weekends, 
statutory holidays, and any other approved scheduled time off.  
Changing Status – Auxiliary to Regular (Different Classification)  
The increment date for auxiliary employees who are appointed to a regular position that is 
not at the same classification is the date of appointment to the new position.  
Changing Status – Regular to Auxiliary  
Regular employees who accept auxiliary employment are considered to be new hires. 
Their increment date is the date that would apply to new auxiliary employees.  
Increment Deferrals – Leave of Absence  
Employees who take a leave of absence without pay, except for union (nurses only), 
maternity, adoption, parental, or education leave, that lasts for more than 30 consecutive 
calendar days (where at least 30 days of the leave are taken prior to the increment date) 
will have their increment date deferred by the period of the leave of absence. The deferred 
date becomes the employee’s new anniversary date for increment purposes.  
Increment Deferrals – Recall from Layoff  
Regular employees recalled from layoff will have their increment anniversary date 
deferred by the period of the layoff. The deferred date becomes the employee’s new 
anniversary date for increment purposes. 
5 
Salary Protection  
Excluded Employees  
Salary protection will apply when a salary rate reduction is caused other than by the 
employee. For employees who are classified under the Management Classification and 
Compensation Framework (MCCF):  
• Deputy ministers will determine their compensation using the same considerations 
they would use for other compensation decisions;  
• If a decision is made to reduce an employee’s salary, the deputy minister will 
provide written notice to the employee confirming that the salary rate will be 
maintained for the first 12 months (no wage increases during this period) and 
explain the process and time frame for any subsequent salary reduction;  
• If the employee initiates a move to another position, the salary will be negotiated 
between the employee and the employer; and  
• If the employer initiates a move to another position or salary rate, and the 
employee’s current protected salary is greater than the new rate, the protected 
salary is reduced starting on the anniversary of the placement or new salary rate.  
For employees who are classified as senior executive assistant, executive administrative 
assistant, judicial administrative assistant, bargaining unit equivalent (for example, 
Schedule “A” and Category B), and Sub-Levels of Management Level 1:  
• Their salary rate will be maintained until the job rate of the new position or 
classification exceeds their protected salary (for example, they do not receive any 
general salary increases until the protected salary has been exceeded);  
• For subsequent employee or employer-initiated promotions, if the job rate of the 
new position or classification is below the employee’s protected salary, the 
protected salary is maintained until the job rate exceeds the protected salary; and  
• For subsequent employee or employer initiated lateral transfers, employees will 
continue to receive their protected salary. 
Bargaining Unit Employees  
Bargaining unit employees are entitled to only those allowances that apply to the position 
they have been placed or reclassified into. Premium payments, such as overtime, are 
calculated against the protected salary.  
6 
When bargaining unit employees are promoted:  
• Any salary increase is calculated in accordance with the collective agreement and 
based on the employee’s protected salary. The new salary will not exceed the 
maximum salary of the new position, except where the protected salary before 
promotion exceeds the maximum salary level of the new position (see below);  
• Employees should not receive less salary than their protected salary prior to the 
promotion. Where the protected salary before promotion exceeds the maximum 
salary level of the new position, the employee will continue to receive the protected 
salary with the add-to-pay adjusted accordingly; and  
• If the new position is classified at the salary level on which their salary protection is 
based, the salary assigned will be the same as it would have been had they not 
been reclassified or placed in a lower position.  
Where employees receiving a protected salary are laterally transferred by the employer, 
they will continue to receive the protected salary in the new position.  
Salary protection is not applied where employees are demoted to or they apply for and 
receive a lateral transfer to a position with the same or lower maximum salary. The new 
salary is calculated in accordance with the applicable collective agreements based on the 
salary they were receiving prior to the demotion or voluntary transfer, but will not exceed 
the maximum of the new salary range.  
Regular employees who are temporarily appointed to a position that is reclassified 
downward are eligible to receive salary protection for the original term of the temporary 
appointment. However, any subsequent extensions or future temporary appointments to 
the position are made at the correct job rate. If employees receiving salary protection as a 
result of this provision win a competition for the position they are temporarily appointed 
to, they lose the salary protection and are paid at the correct salary rate for the position. 
The employer may place employees who are receiving salary protection in another 
position classified at the employee’s former salary level. 
7 
Leave Without Pay  
During a period of leave without pay, employees are not entitled to receive salary 
increases that commence during the period of leave. Maternity and parental leave 
allowances will be recalculated to reflect general wage increases to an employee’s basic 
pay that occur while on maternity or parental leave.  
Temporary Work Assignment  
All temporary work assignments (substitution pay, temporary appointment, or temporary 
reclassification) must have a current approved classification before a salary can be 
offered.  
Movement from One Employee Group to Another  
All employees who move from one employee category to another (including to or from a 
bargaining unit), with no break in service, will be governed by the terms and conditions of 
employment of the group into which they are moving, with the exception of the salary 
protection rules.  
Where employees have in-service status, years of continuous service credited to date will 
be carried forward to the new category. Any benefits that are based on service will also be 
carried forward if they apply in the new category.  
Overpayment  
If employees are found to have been overpaid, the organization is required to recover the 
overpayment unless authority to write off or extinguish the debt has been obtained under 
the Financial Administration Act. Recovery is required regardless of the cause of the 
overpayment. Overpayment recovery applies to wages, allowances, and reimbursable 
expenses.  
The employee’s consent is required before any recovery action is taken. If the employee 
does not agree to pay back the debt, a grievance (bargaining unit) or legal action 
(excluded) must be commenced.  
Severance Packages  
If an employee is re-employed or contracted by the BC Public Service within the period of 
time following separation which is equivalent to the length of time used in the calculation 
of their severance pay, they are required to reimburse any payment equivalent to the time 
8 
remaining in that period. For example, an employee who received the equivalent of three 
months pay for severance, and was re-employed after one month, would repay the 
equivalent of two months pay. 
Honouraria  
Employees are not eligible to receive honouraria from government. An honorarium is a 
nominal lump sum payment for a service or action. If the employer needs to compensate 
employees for work that is outside of their job duties (such as speaking engagements or 
making special presentations) and is not covered by their regular salary, a contract should 
be established with them for the additional service or action. 
Benefits 
The employer and employee share accountability for an effective benefits program and 
for controlling overall costs:  
• The employer provides a safe and healthy work environment and an appropriate 
benefits program; and  
• Employees must attend work on a regular basis and access benefits to which they 
are eligible only when legitimately required. 
Leave 
Leave Management  
Supervisors, as leave sign-off authorities with expense authority, and employees each 
have accountability for effective leave management. Supervisors, with expense authority, 
must:  
• review employee leave requests and approve recorded leave on a timely basis,  
• confirm leave banks before approving leave and/or authorizing leave banks to be 
paid out, and  
• ensure sufficient funds exist within their respective budgets to provide for costs 
associated with leave. 
9 
Employees must ensure that:  
• leave is authorized,  
• leave taken is recorded on a timely basis,  
• leave balance records are correct, and  
• leave banks are not exceeded. 
Paid Absence Prior to Retirement  
Once an employee commences the use of earned, purchased or accumulated time 
immediately prior to retirement, the normal employment relationship is considered to be 
modified in that the employee is no longer committed to return to work and, likewise, the 
employer is no longer committed to provide work.  
During Paid Absence Prior to Retirement the individual continues as an employee for the 
purpose of pensionable service and contribution to the Public Service Pension Plan, if 
applicable, and continues to be covered by the Group Life, Extended Health Care, Dental 
and Medical plans.  
Upon commencement of Paid Absence Prior to Retirement, no further adjustments are to 
be made to the length of leave for reasons of illness or other circumstances, other than 
death. In the event of death, all remaining leave entitlement will be paid to the employee’s 
appointee’s spouse or estate.  
Exceptions to this rule include Pre-1978 50% Sick Bank Entitlement and Salaried Physician 
Pre-retirement leave which is forfeited in the event of death. 
All hourly leave/time banks are expended on the basis of a seven-hour shift, 35-hour work 
week. The Pre-1978 50% Sick Bank and the Retirement Allowance (and severance, if 
applicable), if used as Paid Absence Prior to Retirement, will be the last leaves utilized after 
all other leaves have been concluded, and cannot be used to increase any prior leave 
entitlement or bridge any individual to the next calendar year for purposes of vacation 
entitlement. Where an employee/appointee is on Paid Absence Prior to Retirement, and 
the paid absence carries over from the year the employee/appointee was last actively at 
work to the next calendar year, they shall earn and be granted a full year’s vacation 
entitlement in that next calendar year. When the paid absence extends into more than 
one subsequent calendar year the employee/appointee will not earn or be granted any 
further vacation benefits. General salary increases or increments that become effective 
10 
during Paid Absence Prior to Retirement will be applied to the employee/appointees salary 
with the exception of employees with salary protection. 
Leave for Athletic Events  
Regular employees who have been selected to represent British Columbia or Canada in 
designated international or nation multi-sport athletic events as an athlete, coach or 
judging official may be eligible for athletic leave.  
Designated athletic events are: the Olympic Games, the Commonwealth Games, the Pan
American Games, the Canada Games, the Paralympic Games and the North American 
Indigenous Games.  
The employer will match with paid leave each day of leave contributed by the employee up 
to a maximum contribution by the employer of 8 days (56 hours) in any twelve-month 
period.  
All leave approvals will be based on operational requirements and leave may be 
considered for training purposes in preparation for the event.  
The employee must provide the employer an official letter or document from the 
sponsoring athletic event that indicates an employee’s participation in the athletic event. 
11 